Computer Graphics
Introduction
Computer graphics is a field related to the generation of graphics using computers. It includes 
the creation, storage and manipulation of images of objects. These objects come from diverse 
fields such as physical, mathematical engineering , architectural abstract structures and natural 
phenomenon. Computer graphics today is largely interactive; that is largely interactive; that is 
the user controls the contents structure and appearance of images of the objects by using input 
devices such as a keyboard, mouse, or touch sensitive panel on the screen
Until the early 1980’s computer graphics was a small specialized field, largely because the 
hardware was expensive and graphics based application programs that were easy to use and cost 
effective were few. Then personal computers with built in raster graphics displays such as the 
Xerox Star Apple Macintosh and the IBM PC – popularized the use of bitmap graphics for user 
computer interaction. A bitmap is a ones and zeros representation of the rectangular array of 
points on the screen. Each point is called a pixel, short for “picture elements”. Once the bitmap 
graphics became affordable an explosion of easy to use and inexpensive graphics based user 
interfaces allowed millions of new users to control simple low cost application programs such as 
word processors, spreadsheets and drawing programs
The concept of a “desktop” now became popular metaphor for organizing screen space. By means 
of a window manager the user could create position and resize rectangular screen areas called 
windows. This allowed user to switch among multiple activities just by pointing and clicking at 
the desired window , typically with a mouse. Besides windows, icons which represent data files , 
application program, file cabinets, mailboxes. Printers , recycle bin and so on, made the user 
computer interaction more effective . by pointing and clicking the icons, users could activate the 
corresponding programs or objects which replaced much of the typing of the commands used in 
earlier operating systems and computer applications . today almost all interactive application 
programs even those for manipulating text i.e. word processor) or numerical data (e.g. 
spreadsheet programs) use graphics extensively in the user interface and for visualizing and 
manipulating the application specific objects.
Anil Verma, IOE Pulchowk

Even people who do not use computers encounter computer graphics in TV commercials and as 
cinematic special effects. Thus computer graphics is an integral part of all computer user 
interfaces, and is indispensable for visualizing 2D, 3D objects in all most all areas such as 
education , science , engineering, medicine, commerce the military adversiting and 
entertainment. The theme is that learning how to program and use computers now includes 
learning how to use simple 2D graphics
Early history of computer graphics
We need to take a brief look at the historical development of computer graphics to place today’s 
system in context. Crude plotting of hardcopy devices such as teletypes and line printers dates 
from the early days of computing. The whirlwind computer developed in 1950 at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) had computer driven CRT displays for output. The 
SAGE air-defense system developed in the middle 1950s was the first to use command and 
control CRT display consoles on which operators identified targets with light pens (hand held 
pointing devices that sense light emitted by objects on the screen) Later on Sketchpad system by 
Ivan Sutherland came in light. That was the beginning of modern interactive graphics. In this 
system, keyboard and light pen were used for pointing, making choices and drawing.
At the same time, it was becoming clear to computer, automobile, and aerospace manufacturers 
that (CAD) and computer aided manufacturing (CAM) activities had enormous potential for 
automating drafting and other drawing intensive activities. The General Motors DAC system for 
automobile design and the Itek-Digitek system for lens design were pioneering efforts that 
showed the utility of graphical interaction in the iterative design cycles common in engineering. 
By the mid 60s, a number of commercial products using these systems had appeared
At that time only the most technology intensive organizations could use the interactive computer 
graphics where as others used punch cards, a non-interactive system .
Among the reasons for this were these:
•
The high cost of graphics hardware – at a time when automobiles cost a few thousand 
dollars, computers cost several millions of dollars, and the first commercial computer 
displays cost more than a hundred thousand dollars
Anil Verma, IOE Pulchowk

•
The need for large scale expensive computing resources to support massive design 
database
•
The difficulty of writing large interactive programs using batch oriented FORTRAN 
programming
•
One of a kind , non-portable software, typically written for a particular manufacturer’s 
display devices. When software is non-portable, moving to new display devices 
necessitates expensive and time consuming rewriting of working programs
Thus interactive computer graphics had a limited use when it started in the early sixties but it 
became very common once the Apple Macintosh and IBM PC appeared in the market with 
affordable cost.
Representative uses of computer graphics
Computer graphics is used today in many different areas of science, engineering , industry 
business, education, entertainment, medicine art and training 
All of these are included in the following categories
1. User interfaces
most applications have user interfaces that rely on the desktop window systems to manage 
multiple simultaneous activities and on point and click facilities to allow users to select menu 
items, icons, and objects on the screen These activities fall under computer graphics. Typing is 
necessary only to input text to be stored and manipulated. For example, word processing 
spreadsheet and desktop publishing programs are the typical examples where user interface 
techniques are implemented
2. Plotting
plotting 2D and 3D graphs of mathematical physical and economic functions use computer 
graphics extensively The histograms, bar and pie charts, the task scheduling charts, are the 
most commonly used plotting . These are all used to present meaningfully and concisely the 
trends and patterns of complex data
3. Office automation and electronic publishing
Anil Verma, IOE Pulchowk

computer graphics has facilitated the office automation and electronic publishing which is 
also popularly known as desktop publishing, giving more power to the organizations to print 
the meaningful materials in house. Office automation and electronic publishing can produce 
both traditional printed (hardcopy) documents and electronic (softcopy) documents that 
contain text tables, graphs and other forms of drawn or scanned in graphics
4. Computer aided drafting and design
one of the major uses of computer graphics is to design components and systems of 
mechanical , electrical , electrochemical and electronic devices , including structures such as 
buildings automobile bodies, airplane and ship hulls, very large scale integrated (VLSI) chips 
optical systems and telephone and computer networks . These designs are more frequently 
used to test structural , electrical and thermal properties of the systems
5. Scientific and business visualization
Generating computer graphics for scientific, engineering and medical data sets is termed as 
scientific visualization where as business visualization is related with the non scientific data 
sets such as  those obtained in economics. Visualization makes easier to understand the trends 
and patterns inherent in huge amount of data sets. It would otherwise be almost impossible to 
analyze those data numerically
6. Simulation
Simulation is the imitation of the conditions like those, which is encountered in real life. 
Simulation thus helps to learn or to feel the conditions one might have to face in near future 
with out being in danger at the beginning of the course. For example, astronauts can exercise 
the feeling of weightlessness in a simulator, similarly a pilot training can be conducted in a 
flight simulator . The military tank simulator the naval simulator, driving simulator , air 
traffic control simulator, heavy duty vehicle simulator and so on are some of the mostly used 
simulator in practice. Simulators are also used to optimize the system
Anil Verma, IOE Pulchowk

For example the vehicle, observing the reactions of the driver during the operation of the 
simulator
7. Entertainment
Disney movies such as Lion King and the beauty and the beast, and other scientific movies 
like star trek are the best examples of the application of computer graphics in the field of 
entertainment. Instead of drawing all the necessary frames with slightly changing scenes for 
the production of cartoon film only the key frames are sufficient for such cartoon film where 
the in between frames are interpolated by the graphics system dramatically decreasing the 
cost production while maintaining the quality. Computer and video games such as Fifa, 
Formula-1, Doom and Pools are few to name where computer graphics is used extensively
8. Art and commerce
Here computer graphics is used to produce pictures that expresses a message and attract 
attention such as a new model of a car moving along the ring of the Saturn. These pictures are 
frequently seen at transportation terminals, supermarkets, hotels etc. the slide production for 
commercial , scientific, or educational presentations is another cost effective use of computer 
graphics. One of such graphics packages is “PowerPoint”.
9. Cartography
Cartography is a subject which deals with the making of maps and charts. Computer graphics 
is used to produce both accurate and schematic representations of geographical and other 
natural phenomena from measurement data. Examples include geographic maps, 
oceanographic charts, weather maps, contour maps and population density maps
Surfer is one of such graphics packages which is extensively used for cartography
 
Anil Verma, IOE Pulchowk
